Document kuery (KQL) filtering and improve Fleet API page structure (#7067)
elastic/docs-content: reference/fleet/fleet-api-docs.md

# Kibana Fleet APIs [fleet-api-docs]

This page provides cURL and {{kib}} Console examples for commonly used {{fleet}} APIs, including agent policies, integration policies, enrollment tokens, agent listing, KQL filtering, and agent rollback.

For full endpoint specifications, parameters, and response schemas, refer to the [Kibana API docs]({{kib-apis}}). For {{serverless-full}} projects, use the [Kibana Serverless API docs]({{kib-serverless-apis}}).

## Before you begin [fleet-api-before-you-begin]

You'll need:

* A running {{kib}} deployment or {{serverless-full}} project with {{fleet}} available
* The {{kib}} host URL for your deployment (for example, `https://my-kibana-host:9243`)
* Authentication credentials for {{kib}} API requests. API key authentication is recommended. For details, refer to [Authentication]({{kib-apis}}authentication).
* A {{kib}} user with the required {{fleet}} and {{integrations}} privileges. For details, refer to [Roles and privileges](/reference/fleet/fleet-roles-privileges.md).

## Using the Console [using-the-console]

You can run {{fleet}} API requests through the {{kib}} Console.

> 1. From the {{kib}} menu, go to **Management → Dev Tools**.

Reviewer: I don't think this wording aligns with our guidance on [referring to apps and pages](https://docs.elastic.dev/tech-writing-guidelines/ui-writing#referring-to-apps-and-pages).

Reviewer 2: You mean this one: https://www.elastic.co/docs/contribute-docs/style-guide/ui-writing#referring-to-apps-and-pages

```

## Filter results with KQL [filter-results-with-kql]

The {{fleet}} list endpoints for agents, agent policies, package policies, and enrollment tokens accept a `kuery` query parameter that takes a [{{kib}} Query Language (KQL)](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/kql.md) string to filter results. To check whether another endpoint accepts `kuery`, refer to its parameters in the [Kibana API docs]({{kib-apis}}).

> Reference each field by the saved object type that stores it. {{fleet}} stores package policies as `ingest-package-policies` objects, so to filter package policies by integration name, query the `ingest-package-policies.package.name` field.

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure this isn't true. Agents and enrollment tokens are not saved objects. They are stored in `.fleet-*` system indices so they must be referenced directly with no saved object prefix.

Your example for **package policies** works in [redacted] test cluster (I'll share w/you on Slack).
```
GET kbn:/api/fleet/package_policies?kuery=ingest-package-policies.package.name:activemq
```
✅ 
```
{
  "items": [
    {
      "id": "9xxxxa3-b6b2-4xxx-8f20-bb9822xxxxxe",
      "version": "WxxxxxxxxxQ==",
      "name": "activemq-1",
...
```
However, appending the saved object type to an **agent** call does not work:

```
GET kbn:/api/fleet/agents?kuery=ingest-agents.status:online
```

```
{
  "statusCode": 400,
  "error": "Bad Request",
  "message": "[request query.kuery]: KQLSyntaxError: This key 'ingest-agents.status' does NOT exist in fleet-agents saved object index patterns"
}
```

Excluding the saved object type from an **agent** call does work:

```
GET kbn:/api/fleet/agents?kuery=status:online
```
✅ 
```
{
  "items": [
    {
      "id": "3xxxx1-4a0a-4b00-bxxxx20xxxxx9d4",
      "type": "PERMANENT",
      "active": true,
...
```

Reviewer: @vishaangelova keep me honest here

Reviewer 2: Ok, so actually only these two Fleet endpoints are backed by saved objects:
- Agent policies (`GET /api/fleet/agent_policies`): stored as a `fleet-agent-policies` saved object, or, on deployments where space awareness is off, as the legacy `ingest-agent-policies` saved object ([#1](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/common/constants/agent_policy.ts#L8-L9) and [#2](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/server/services/agent_policy.ts#L203-L207)).
  - Use `fleet-agent-policies.<field>` in the KQL prefix; the legacy `ingest-agent-policies.<field>` also works because Fleet normalizes either prefix at runtime ([#3](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/server/services/agent_policy.ts#L183-L201))
- Package policies (`GET /api/fleet/package_policies`): stored as a `fleet-package-policies` saved object, or, on deployments where space awareness is off, as the legacy `ingest-package-policies` saved object ([#1](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/common/constants/package_policy.ts#L8-L10), and [#2](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/server/services/package_policy.ts#L291-L295)).
  - Use `fleet-package-policies.<field>`, but the legacy `ingest-package-policies.<field>` also works for the same reason as above ([#3](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/server/services/package_policy.ts#L338-L356)).

Agents (`GET /api/fleet/agents`) are stored in the `.fleet-agents` ES system index ([#1](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/common/constants/agent.ts#L8-L26)). So these should be referenced without a prefix (e.g., `status:online`). However, here `fleet-agents.status:online` also works because Fleet strips it from the kuery ([#2](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/server/services/agents/crud.ts#L85-L87)), but `ingest-agents.` does not exist, and that returns an error.

Enrollment API keys (`GET /api/fleet/enrollment_api_keys`) are stored in the `.fleet-enrollment-api-keys` ES system index ([#1](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/common/constants/enrollment_api_key.ts#L8)), but here no prefix should be used as the kuery is passed straight through to the index search (e.g., `policy_id:"<policy-id>"`).

Author: Thanks so much, both of you, this was really helpful. I tested it all on a 9.4.2 cluster and your breakdown held up, with one surprise.

fleet-agent-policies.<field> doesn't actually work on 9.4.2. It 400s, and only ingest-agent-policies.<field> or a bare name:"..." work, even though the data is stored under the fleet-* types (confirmed with a type agg on .kibana*). 

In the doc I went with bare fields where possible, prefixed only nested fields like package.name, and added a tip that the KQLSyntaxError names the exact pattern to use.

@vishaangelova does fleet-agent-policies.<field> work for you on main? Thanks again.

Reviewer: I can confirm that `fleet-agent-policies.name` 400s and the following actually work:

```
GET kbn:/api/fleet/agent_policies?kuery=ingest-agent-policies.name:"Elastic Cloud agent policy"
GET kbn:/api/fleet/agent_policies?kuery=name:"Elastic Cloud agent policy"
```

Tested on 9.4.3 (unreleased)

Reviewer 2: Hi @paul-tavares, pulling you in this thread to confirm if the way this works is by design:

On `GET /api/fleet/agent_policies`, the kuery validator rejects the `fleet-agent-policies.<field>` prefix (returns a 400 `KQLSyntaxError`), so only `ingest-agent-policies.<field>` or bare fields work. On `GET /api/fleet/package_policies` the validator was widened to accept both prefixes as part of https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/227862, but the equivalent change doesn't seem to have been made for agent policies. Wondering if this was intentional, so we can document the right prefix?

Reviewer 2: Sorry, after checking with Paul, it seems maybe @criamico could help instead?

Reviewer 3: > On GET /api/fleet/agent_policies, the kuery validator rejects the fleet-agent-policies.<field> prefix (returns a 400 KQLSyntaxError), so only ingest-agent-policies.<field> or bare fields work. 

I just checked the code and verified that the [KQL validator](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/8be46b300b632f4562d4df86a48793464cadfd1f/x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/fleet/server/types/rest_spec/agent_policy.ts#L44-L45) rejects any kuery prefixed with fleet-agent-policies. This was probably missed when doing the work for space awareness. It is actually a bug, so I'll open a ticket to track it.

Reviewer 3: Link to ticket for the KQL bug: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/275810

**Agents and enrollment tokens** are stored in {{es}} system indices. Reference fields directly, with no prefix. This cURL example returns only the online agents:

```shell
curl --request GET \
  --url 'https://my-kibana-host:9243/api/fleet/agents?kuery=status:online' \
  --header 'Authorization: ApiKey yourbase64encodedkey' \
  --header 'kbn-xsrf: xx'
```

**Agent policies and package policies** are stored as saved objects. When a field path contains a dot, prefix it with the saved object type so the query parser reads it as a field name and not as a type. This cURL example returns only the package policies for the `nginx` integration:

```shell
curl --request GET \
  --url 'https://my-kibana-host:9243/api/fleet/package_policies?kuery=ingest-package-policies.package.name:nginx' \
  --header 'Authorization: ApiKey yourbase64encodedkey' \
  --header 'kbn-xsrf: xx'
```

::::{tip}

> The accepted saved object type prefix can differ across deployments and endpoints. If a query returns a `KQLSyntaxError` stating that a key does not exist in a saved object index pattern, use the index pattern named in the error as your prefix. For example, if the error names `ingest-agent-policies`, query `ingest-agent-policies.name`.

Reviewer: I like this tip but the current wording only handles the KQLSyntaxError that names the index pattern (for example, `ingest-agents.status` on the agents endpoint). Forgetting the prefix on a nested field produces a different error that does not have this pattern:

```
GET kbn:/api/fleet/package_policies?kuery=package.name:nginx
```

```
{
  "statusCode": 400,
  "error": "Bad Request",
  "message": "This type package is not allowed: Bad Request"
}
```

Here the parser reads package as a saved object type and rejects it, so there's no index pattern in the error to copy. Could we broaden the tip to cover both errors? Something like:

```suggestion
If a query returns an error like `This type <x> is not allowed` or a `KQLSyntaxError` about a missing key, the field needs the saved object type as a prefix. If the error names an index pattern, use that; otherwise prefix with the endpoint's saved object type (for example, `ingest-package-policies` for package policies).
```

Author: Good catch. Broadened the tip to name both errors. Thanks!

If no version is available on disk to rollback to, you get an error.
This situation can happen if:

- The version you upgraded from is earlier than 9.3.0, as the feature is not supported for earlier versions.

- The rollback window has ended (typically more than seven days). When the rollback window ends, the files from the previous version are removed to free up disk space.

## Next steps [fleet-api-next-steps]

After you create agent and integration policies with the API:

* [Enroll {{agents}}](/reference/fleet/fleet-enrollment-tokens.md) using enrollment tokens from your agent policy
* [Manage {{agents}} in {{fleet}}](/reference/fleet/manage-elastic-agents-in-fleet.md) to monitor status and policy assignments
* [Create an agent policy without using the UI](/reference/fleet/create-policy-no-ui.md) for automation use cases

## Related pages [fleet-api-related-pages]

* [Kibana API docs]({{kib-apis}})
* [Run API requests](/explore-analyze/query-filter/tools/console.md)
* [Roles and privileges](/reference/fleet/fleet-roles-privileges.md)

> * [Fleet enrollment tokens](/reference/fleet/fleet-enrollment-tokens.md)

Reviewer: This is the same link that's right above this section. I'm not sure how useful it is to list it twice.
